# BIGCAAT
BIGDAWG Integrated GFE Customization and Amino Acid Testing (BIGCAAT) - software for standardizing and analyzing
HLA disease-associated motifs at a gene feature and amino acid level 

This repository contains all files and code relevant to Livia Tran’s Master’s Final Report. 

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) affects 2.3 million people globally by inducing persistent inflammation of the central nervous system​. Prior to single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and genotype wide association studies (GWAS) technologies, research conducted via tissue typing showed strong correlation of MS with alleles of the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) loci, a set of highly polymorphic genes located in the Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC). HLA has been a gene of interest due to its strong association with disease and the immune system. However, due to HLA’s polymorphic nature, previous genotyping methods, such as Sanger sequencing, were unable to provide full gene sequence information, and only provided sequence data for a few key exons. Next generation sequencing (NGS) has made it possible to procure full gene sequences of most HLA alleles at high throughput , leading to better understanding of HLA’s impact on disease and healthcare. A number of HLA variants are studied for clinical and epidemiological purposes, with the HLA-DRB1*15:01 allele identified as the primary genetic determinant of MS. HLA-DRB1 has been studied extensively, but variation in other HLA alleles is less clearly defined due to linkage equilibrium (LD). Evaluating the contribution of other HLA genes to MS is thus warranted, as it may lead to further disease characterization for MS.
Current HLA basic and clinical research uses an HLA nomenclature created by the World Health Organization Nomenclature Committee for Factors of the HLA System.
Historically, the HLA nomenclature has pertained to unique core exon sequences. However, recent HIV and Hepatitis B studies have identified disease-associated motifs in regions other than core exons, such as introns and untranslated regions. Variation in the 3’ UTR of HLA-C regulates microRNA binding to its target site, leading to low surface expression of alleles that bind this microRNA and increased expression of HLA-C alleles prone to averting post-transcriptional regulation ​in HIV. In Hepatitis B, a novel variant of HLA-DPB1’s 3’UTR region was found to be significant in Hepatitis B recovery​. HLA-B, through an intron-encoded microRNA, miR-6891-5p, has been shown to impact immunological responses by affecting cell transcripts in a number of metabolic pathways. Specifically, immunoglobulin heavy alpha chains (e.g. IGHA1 and IGHA2) were targeted, and were found to have multiple miR-6891-5p target sites. Conserved binding sites for this miRNA were identified in the 3’UTR region of IGHA1 and IGHA2, indicating the importance of 3’UTR regions in immunological metabolic responses. These crucial examples warrant further analysis on how non-core exon variation plays a role in disease, and how to best identify these motifs. Through employing bioinformatic tools, specifically Gene Feature Enumeration (GFE) and Sequence Feature Variant Type (SFVT) analysis, the association of non-core exon variation, either on a level of amino acid or nucleotide differences, with disease may be uncovered.
Modern HLA Nomenclature assigns each unique HLA allele a name consisting of four colon-delimited fields. The first field identifies the allele group/family (aka, antigen type). This is applicable to all HLA genes except for HLA-DPB1, which has no allele families. The second field denotes unique protein sequences for each specific allele, in order of identification. The third field indicates sequences with synonymous substitutions for a given protein sequence, in order of identification. Lastly, the fourth field shows sequences with nucleotide substitutions in non-core regions (introns and UTRs) for a given synonymous sequence in an exon, in order of identification. This nomenclature does not identify sequence patterns and polymorphism across exons, introns, and UTRs, collectively referred to as Gene Features (GFs), at a given locus.

This project delineates analyzing specific GFs for novel associated motifs in non-core exons, introns, or UTRs into Module 1, and amino acid motifs into Module 2. This repository contains software I have written to utilize BIGDAWG to reanalyze previously published MS data on a gene feature and amino acid level. 


Files and functions are organized into Module 1 and Module 2.

